FILE: Ship Guard Manual Edn A_2 - IDP600Series - Final 23-04-2013.pdf
FOLDER: E-72 SSAS
DATE: 2026-03-07 10:29:07.048439
==================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
RO5

SHIPGUARD V4

IDP600 Terminal Series
(EDITION A, REVISION 02)

TECHNICAL/USER GUIDE

Page 1 of 34

--- PAGE 2 ---
1.0  Revisions history

Date Edition | Revision | Comments Approved
28/12/11 A 01 Initial issue PM
13-04-11 A 02 Editing POR

R05 Page 2 of 34

--- PAGE 3 ---
2.0 Table of Contents

1.0  REVISIONS HISTORY

20 TABLE OF CONTENTS

3.0 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITY

3.1 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ..
Regulatory Authority.
Principal Rules Governing SSAS

4.0 SYSTEM OVERVIEW

4.1 SYSTEM DESCRIPTION.....

4.2 TRACKING AND ALERT MESSAGES..
4.3 VESSEL EQUIPMENT ..

Terminal Function

SHORE EQUIPMENT
VESSEL INITIATES AN ALER

© xNNNNOOO® @ Lua O W N

5.0  SYSTEM DESCRIPTION AND INSTALLATION

5.1 GENERAL...
.1.1..... Power Supply 10
Power Consumption

Control/Junction Box
Security Alert Buttons & Cabling
Initial Power-Up
.1.9..... Anti Tamper Label
52 QUICK INSTALL GUIDE ..

6.0 SYSTEM COMMISSIONING 16

6.1 GENERAL.....

6.2 TERMINAL REGISTRATION

6.3 COMMISSIONING PROCEDURE
6.3.1..... SSAS Initial Test

6.4 RILLS AND TESTS.

6.5 RECOMMENDED TEST INTERVALS

6.6 PERIODIC TESTING OF SHIP SECURITY ALERT SYSTEM

7.0 SAFETY WARNINGS 18
71 GENERAL SAFETY WARNINGS ...

8.0 MAINTENANCE AND SUPPORT INFORMATION 19
8.1 CLEANING 19

8.2 TECHNICAL SUPPORT AND INFORMATION
TEL: +46 771460 100 ..
SERVICE@TRANSAS.COM

9.0 REGULATORY AND TYPE APPROVAL INFORMATION 20
9.1 LIMITATIONS ON INTENDED OPERATING ENVIRONMENT .....

R05 Page 3 of 34

--- PAGE 4 ---
9.2 COMPLIANCE...
10.0 TERMINAL SPECIFICATIONS 21

10.1 PHYSICAL DIMENSIONS
10.2 ENVIRONMENTAL.....
103 RF SPECIFICATIONS ..

104  GPS...
10.5  COMPASS SAFE DISTANC
11.0 APPENDICES 23

111 APPENDIX | - STANDARD SCOPE OF SUPPLY.

11.1.1... Optional Items...
11.2 APPENDIX Il - SCHEMATIC AND WIRING DIAGRAL
Control Box Connection

APPENDIX IV - MSC CIRCULAR 1072....
11.5  APPENDIX V - MSC — RESOLUTION 147/77 ..
11.6  APPENDIX VI — INMARSAT SATELLITE COVERAGI
11.7  GL CERTIFICATE OF CONFORMITY.....

R05 Page 4 of 34

--- PAGE 5 ---
3.0 Executive Summary and Regulatory Authority
3.1 Executive Summary

The Transas ship security alert system (SSAS) — Ship Guard - has been designed to comply
with all relevant legislation and provide a means whereby a vessel can raise a discrete alarm
to the required shore authorities when its security has either been compromised or is thought
to be under threat.

3.1.1 Regulatory Authority

On board security alert systems are governed by various internationally agreed rules and
regulations as promulgated by the International Maritime Organisation — IMO, as
recommended by its” associated sub-committees, principally the Maritime Safety Committee
(MSC).

Where individual Flag States or Administrations have particular requirements specific to that
organisation these requirements are taken into account but within the terms of reference of
the preceding paragraph.

3.1.2 Principal Rules Governing SSAS

International Port and Ship Security (ISPS) Code.
SOLAS XI-2 Regulation 6 — as amended

MSC - Resolution 136/76 — Performance standards.
MSC - Resolution 147/77 — Performance standards
MSC Circular 1072

R05 Page 5 of 34

--- PAGE 6 ---
4.0 System Overview
4.1  System Description

The system offered consists of an independent SkyWave IDP 600 Series Terminal and
associated equipment. It is a self-contained unit with integral GPS and satellite modem for
communicating with Inmarsat satellite therefore requires no interfacing with ships equipment
(other than power supply) to operate in full compliance with SOLAS requirements.

SkyWave IsatData Pro network is used with Internet-based application to provide a
seamless link between the vessel and shore-side authorities.

4.2 Tracking and Alert Messages

In addition to satisfying the SOLAS security alert requirements, the terminal is capable of
data position report transmission for day-to-day tracking purposes that can be monitored on
the service provider's web tracking site www.fleetviewonline.com , while at the same time it
will respond instantly to the activation of any one of the SECURITY ALERT buttons located
within the vessel.

4.3  Vessel Equipment
On board equipment consists of:

IDP 600 series terminal with integral GPS/antenna/modem and processor
Terminal mounting kit

Power/data cabling

Function control/junction box

Security alert buttons (2)

Security alert button cabling

The above listed equipment is supplied in kit form, the aim being to provide a modular kit
that will enable the ship operator to easily fit and commission a system with the minimum of
disruption to the vessel and a low crew training requirement.

4.3.1 Terminal Function

The IDP 600 Series terminal is a self-contained unit that is supplied pre-programmed. It has
an internal GPS and apart from power supply and the alert buttons requires no interfacing
with any other ships equipment. The power/data cable connects directly the control/junction
box to the Inmarsat IDP 600 Series terminal.

In addition to providing an alert transmission capability, the terminal also enables automatic
sending of scheduled data position reports (DPRY); offering a day-to-day commercial ship
tracking benefit to the ship operator in addition to compliance with regulatory requirements.

The default setting of the terminal is alert functionality only, while tracking functions can be
remotely enabled according to customer requirements.

When used for tracking, ship positions are updated without any user intervention and can be
viewed on the Transas web tracking service FleetViewOnline — www.fleetviewonline.com,
using the provided user access details. In addition the terminal can be “polled” to provide
individual position reports on demand.

Viewing of security alert messages and sending of polling and reset alarm messages are
also performed via the same Internet FleetViewOnline user interface.

R05 Page 6 of 34

--- PAGE 7 ---
The user login and password ensures that only vessels from the registered company can be
viewed. It is not possible for other companies to view ships that are not registered to them.

Control of login and password is with the registered user and can be changed at any time.

4.3.2 Control and Junction Box Function
The control and junction box serves two purposes as its name suggests, namely to:

« Provide user interface for system control and,
« Provide connectivity to the terminal, Security Alert buttons and power supply

4.3.3 System Control

System control is managed via a three position key control, the key can be removed for
security purposes and should be under the control of the Master of the ship.

The function of each position is as follows:

Position 1- OFF
Off, logically disconnects the Security Alert buttons from terminal. Power supply to the
terminal is maintained. System does not stop any tracking function.

Position 2-ON
Operational, in the case of pressing of Security Alert buttons the system will generate
security alert to both ship operator and flag state.

Position 3 -TEST
Test mode, alert messages contain a flag “test” and sent only to ship operator. Used for
system commissioning and as part of scheduled tests.

4.4  Shore Equipment

FleetView Online is web based and can operate on any pc with an internet connection. The
website uses Java VM, therefore a current version of Java must be installed on the
designated PC or network.

Under normal circumstances users will be logged onto FleetViewOnline in order to monitor
their vessels on a day-to-day basis.

4.5 Vessel Initiates an Alert
In the event of a vessel generating an alert, a number of actions are automatically initiated: -

« Afixed message alert is notified to the flag state/operator of the vessel every thirty
minutes via email/sms/fax/telex — as specified

« Alert messages are automatically generated every thirty minutes with positional
information until the alert is cancelled.

*  On FleetViewOnline the coloured background place holder displaying the vessel
name changes to red

R05 Page 7 of 34

--- PAGE 8 ---
4.5.1 Actions Upon Receiving an Alert

In the event of receiving an alert, a plan of action, as detailed in the ship operators’ security
plan, will be implemented. This plan will have been inspected and approved by the relevant
Recognised Security Organisation (RSO) as part of the operators’ compliance with the ISPS
Code.

Although not specific to or within the scope of the SSAS service in general, it can be
expected that the flag state of the vessel and ship operator will enter into dialogue to discuss
the alert.

In addition, if the vessel is in waters adjacent to a coastal state of a country different to that
of it's flag, the flag state of the vessel sending the alert is obliged to notify the administration
of the adjacent coastal state.

R05 Page 8 of 34

--- PAGE 9 ---
5.0 System description and installation

Transas Ship Guard is a simple modular system that can either be installed by a Transas
trained engineer or by suitably qualified member of the ships’ crew. Full guidance on
physical installation and wiring is included in this chapter.

Transas engineers or ships’ crew can also conduct system commissioning; full details of this
are also included in system commissioning section.

5.1  General

Before starting any installation work check contents against detailed order/packing list — any
discrepancies must be reported immediately.

For convenience installation instructions are broken down into module sections.

It is expected that a site survey will have been conducted prior to ordering the system in
order to supply the correct kit version and ensure adequate cabling has been supplied to the
vessel. Your kit will consist:

Figure 1 - Standard Equipment Supply

« Polycarbonate concealment enclosure containing IDP600 series terminal with
attached multi-core power/data cable ( 25m)

Mounting bracket with securing fasteners

/ABS control/junction box enclosure, part wired connector and fittings

Security Alert button enclosures and fittings

Security Alert button cabling

Anti-tamper labels

Technical/user manual

Optional items available
« Power supply unit
* Pole type mounting bracket

RO5 Page 9 of 34

--- PAGE 10 ---
IMPORTANT — THIS UNIT MUST BE CONNECTED TO AN UNINTERRUPTIBLE POWER
SUPPLY UNIT TO ENSURE COMPLAINCE WITH SOLAS REGULATIONS.

Ifin doubt ships’ crew carrying out installation should seek guidance from their technical
managers with respect to fastenings and cable routeing to ensure compliance with any Flag
State or Classification Society requirements. Transas cannot be held liable for such errors or
omissions.

Prior to making any connections or drilling it is recommended to lay out all components and
cabling in the approximate positions in which they will finally be installed.
5.1.1 Power Supply

The security alert system requires a clean/smoothed uninterruptible 24 to 30 VDC supply
with a minimum of 2A current; this must be provided to site of the control/junction box prior to
installation.

Note that the actual power supply and any cabling for running the power to the
control/junction box is for owners supply and is not included as standard.
5.1.2 Power Consumption

Typical power consumption at 12 V and at temperature 22°C:

Average current on receive = 45 mA

Peak current on transmit =1 A

5.1.3 Wire Terminations

All wires must be terminated in accordance with good practice and any Flag or Class
requirements. It is recommended to use spigot ended crimped ferrules or leave the soft wire
end. Soldering wire ends is not recommended since over time solder flows and a previously
tight connection may become loose and may cause a system malfunction.

R05 Page 10 of 34

--- PAGE 11 ---
5.1.4 Terminal

The terminal comes fully pre-programmed in compliance with SOLAS ISPS Code SSAS
regulations. It is certified to IEC 60945/2002, carries the CE approval mark and has an FCC
certificate. It is suitable for above decks installation (IP56), has its own onboard GPS and
receives power via the power/data multi-core cable.

Figure 2 - Skywave IDP-690 Terminal

The terminal will be supplied with a pre-wired 25m multi-core power/data cable and
connector which has been attached to the terminal base entry connection socket.

To aid disguise, the terminal is housed in a polycarbonate plastic enclosure. The enclosure
is attached to a raised base plate that permits attachment to ships rail.

The terminal must be situated where it has a clear view of the sky.

The upper bridge (monkey island, flying bridge) is an appropriate choice for positioning the
terminal and it is not necessary to mount the unit high up on mast structures. This serves to
reduce the length of power/data cable required minimising voltage drop and speeding the
installation process.

However appreciation of shadow/blind sectors needs to be given from mast or funnel
structures.

The terminal must be sited as far away as possible from other radiators

Distance to HF antennas > 5 metre

Distance to VHF antennas > 4 metre

Distance to other Inmarsat transceiver > 1.5 metre
Distance to magnetic compass > 0.3 metre

R05 Page 11 of 34

--- PAGE 12 ---
The terminal must be installed in the horizontal plane as far as is practicable within the
normal seagoing trim of the vessel.

CAUTION - The polycarbonate enclosure must not be painted with any paints containing
metallic elements. This will screen the antenna and prevent signal reception/transmission
and render the system inoperative.

The terminal is fully tested prior to shipment.

« Open the enclosure and attach mounting plate to enclosure using bolts provided. Do
not unplug terminal from power/data cable and ensure cable gland is slack. Leave
cover off until installation is completed

» Position enclosure containing terminal in its approximate final location

» Run power/data cable from bridge top into wheelhouse via appropriate deck
penetration gland, do not secure at this stage

« Ensure adequate cable available to connect to control/junction box situated on
wheelhouse

* Attach plastic enclosure to ship’s rail using the mounting plate and clamps provided.

« Ensure top of enclosure is in horizontal plane within normal seagoing trim range of
vessel

+ NEVER APPLY POWER UNTIL POWER/DATA CABLE IS FULLY AND FINALLY
CONNECTED

5.1.5 Power/Data Cable

The power/data cable is delivered in 25m length (other lengths available to special order).
The terminal end of the cable is fitted with a pre-wired connector and is supplied attached to
the terminal. The "blunt” end of the cable is pre-prepared for connection to the
control/junction box and must be adequately protected during installation.

Any additional deck penetrations/glands or associated welding work required to pass the
antenna cable is the responsibility of the vessel.

UNDER NO CIRCUMSTANCES SHOULD THE POWER/DATA CABLE BE CUT OR END
FITTINGS RE-ATTACHED, AS THIS WILL VOID ANY GUARANTEE AND MAY CAUSE
SYSTEM FAILURE. Once the installation is completed the cable can be secured, with any
spare cable being coiled and fastened.

Minimum Bend Radius 7.5 x Cable Diameter (approx @ 10.5mm)
In order to prevent possible damage to the terminal it is essential to ensure all connections

are secure and in accordance with manufacturers instructions BEFORE connecting power
supply and turning on power. Failure to follow this guidance may invalidate any warranties.

R05 Page 12 of 34

--- PAGE 13 ---
5.1.6 Control/Junction Box

The control/junction box is supplied with all internal wiring but will require the connection of
the power/data cable, alert button cabling and power supply wiring (green connectors). All
cable glands etc are attached.

Figure 3 - Control Box Details

Control box enclosure must be sited to ensure access to the key control.

It is recommended that the control box is loosely positioned prior to final fixing to ensure all
cabling is of adequate length to ensure proper connections.

A wiring diagram is provided in this manual and is also stick to the inside of control box lid.
The usage of cable glands (left side to right side) is following: power cable, primary alert
button, secondary alert button, terminal’s power/data cable.

The DB plug inside the control box is for service purposes and not used in normal
operation.

The braided out screen of power/data cable is connected to terminal connector #2 . The
braided screens of alert cables are connected to pins #4 and #6.

When alert cables and power supply cable have been connected and all connections double
checked mount control/junction box; nip up glands and secure enclosure after testing.

R05 Page 13 of 34

--- PAGE 14 ---
5.1.7 Security Alert Buttons & Cabling

The standard supply is two complete security alert button assemblies plus 30m two core
braided cable.

Itis a SOLAS requirement that one of security alert buttons is positioned in the wheelhouse
area. The location of the second security alert button is to owners’ choice.

Aflip cover is fitted to prevent inadvertent activation of security alert button; this is a
mandatory SOLAS requirement and must not be removed.

Figure 4 - Alert Button Assembly with Flip Covers

The alert buttons are passing contact/momentary type and do not physically indicate status
of the alert system. They are suitable for installation on vessels of any flag.

« Remove front cover of enclosure leaving the pre-assembled alert button attached

« Referring to planned position of security alert buttons, knock out appropriate entry
disc in alert button enclosure to accept cable gland, attach cable gland accordingly

» Pass free end of previously installed alert cable through gland and make connection
to security alert button contact block.

Having double checked connections and continuity with control/junction box close up
enclosure and tighten cable gland. All cable terminations must be to Class standards

5.1.8 Initial Power-Up
Installation is now complete and when satisfied with all connections and fastenings the
system can be powered up.

After powering up the system for the first time (this is known as a cold start), and may take
up to 5-10 minutes to ensure GPS and Inmarsat satellite acquisition. Subsequent starts will
be much quicker.

The single LED located on the IDP 600 series terminal will begin flashing every 2 seconds.

Once a GPS position is acquired the system will ransmit a “Start Up” message to FleetView
Online, which can be confirmed by your office.

R05 Page 14 of 34

--- PAGE 15 ---
5.1.9 Anti Tamper Labels
On completion of installation, please attach supplied anti-tamper labels:

Figure 5 - Optional Anti-tamper Labels

2 x across the join of each of the security alert buttons; 2 x across the join of the control box.

Remaining labels should be kept in the Master’s safe with the key

5.2

Quick Install Guide

See Section 6.3.1 for description of start up sequence.

Attach mounting bracket to terminal enclosure

Run power VDC cable from power supply to the location of control box
Secure polycarbonate enclosure containing terminal on bridge top/monkey island, do
not close up enclosure

Run power/data cable down from terminal to control box

Run alert button cables (bridge plus other location)

Mount bridge and other alert button enclosures, attach alert button cables
At control box connect power/data, alert button and power supply

Check all connections, and power up

Do not close up enclosures until system is commissioned

AFTER commissioning close up all enclosures, apply anti-tamper labels
Set system to ON, stow control key in safe location

RO05

Page 15 of 34

--- PAGE 16 ---
6.0 System commissioning
6.1  General

The IDP-600 series terminal in the Ship Guard kit is supplied as a pre-programmed unit and
requires no user intervention to be fully operational. Any variance from this must be specified
at time of ordering.

A service engineer may be required to attend the vessel if alteration to programming is
required.

6.2 Terminal registration

Before the terminal can be tested/commissioned it must be registered with Transas, this is
the responsibility of the ship operator. A registered terminal upon being powered up is
capable of being tracked and delivering alerts to the shore user interface FleetViewOnline.

6.3 Commissioning procedure

6.3.1 SSAS Initial Test

For convenience the bridge security alert button is called the primary alert button, the other
button(s) are called secondary alert buttons

To commission system always select TEST MODE, this will prevent an alert message being
accidentally sent to Flag Administration, but will none the less test the whole system fully
from end to end as if it were in operational mode. (Technical note - messages sent in Test
mode differs from those in Operational mode by one bit - this allows them to be filtered and
only sent to the company).

The routine testing by ships crew is detailed in a following section. Co-ordination with ship
operators office will be necessary to receive and reset alerts.

Locally record all times, dates and GPS positions when operating security alert buttons.

* Switch on the power supply, the LED on the terminal is showing the presence of
power

* Allow approximately 10 minutes to acquire both GPS and Inmarsat satellite lock

o Activate primary alert button (T=0 mins) — wait approx 35 minutes for initial and
automatic repeat alert to be sent

* At T+40 activate secondary alert button, at T+60 minutes a primary and secondary
alert will be automatically sent

« Liaise with shore office to reset system — reset command is sent to terminal from
ashore

*  When all tests are completed return key to "ON" position —- REMOVE key and stow in
a secure location

* Testing/commissioning is now complete

It is recommended that the regular tests are initiated into company routines to monitor
correct function of this equipment. A suggested test routine for ships’ crew is detailed in
Sections 6.4 - 6.6.

R05 Page 16 of 34

--- PAGE 17 ---
6.4  Drills and tests

According to your company/flag requirements it is possible to test the alert system without
alerting the Flag State of the vessel.

YOU MUST SET THE KEY CONTROL TO TEST POSITION TO DO THIS. FAILURE TO DO
SO WILL SEND AN ALERT MESSAGE TO FLAG STATE AS A REAL ALERT.

6.5 Recommended Test Intervals

« If terminal is being used as a tracking device, test every six months
« Ifterminal is only being used as an SSAS only device, test every 3 months

6.6 Periodic testing of Ship Security Alert System

These notes are designed to assist with on board testing routines for Ship Security Alert
System, and are issued as manufacturer’s guidance only.

ACTION RESULT NOTES
Set control box key to Alert message only | This “blocking” filter is set
TEST goes to company, | automatically

not Flag State

Activate primary/bridge | Initial primary alert | Alert messages will be
and then secondary is sent and received ashore by ship
alert button delivered operator according to
according to shore | settings and displayed in
settings in FVO. SSAS log

Primary &
secondary alert
repeated
automatically at
T+30 minutes

After T+30 minutes System is now System reset message
shore office to confirm | reset — this should | only appears in shore
receipt of SSAS alerts. | be confirmed by SSAS log

Shore office resets shore office

SSAS from ashore

Set key to ON, remove | System is now Any further alerts will now
and stow in secure resetandready to | be treated as real
location use

R05 Page 17 of 34

--- PAGE 18 ---
7.0

AN
]

71

Safety Wamings

BEFORE APPLYING POWER TO THE EQUIPMENT the user must read all
instructions. If in any doubt, consult suitably trained service personnel.

General Safety Warnings

No user serviceable parts inside. Refer servicing to qualified service personnel.

The equipment should be protected by a suitable fuse.

Retain the safety and operating instructions for future reference.

Observe all warnings on the equipment and in the operating instructions.

Follow all operating and user instructions.

Connect the equipment to a power supply only of the type described in the operating
instructions or marked on the equipment.

The terminal unit should be located in accordance with instructions in section 4.
Maximum permissible exposure (MPE) limits — This equipment complies with FCC
(OET bulletin 65) general population/uncontrolled exposure limits as applied to RF
energy from a Mobile device. (A mobile device being defined as a transmitting device
designed to be used in other than fixed locations and to be generally used in such a
way that a separation distance of at least 20 centimetres is normally maintained
between the transmitter's radiating structures and the body of the user or nearby
persons.)

RO05

Page 18 of 34

--- PAGE 19 ---
8.0 Maintenance and Support Information
8.1 Cleaning

Dust and finger marks can be removed using a soft damp cloth. Avoid using domestic
cleaning products.

8.2 Technical Support and Information
For technical support, product queries and information please contact your Transas supplier.

Transas Marine International

46 771 460 100
ervice@transas.com

Authorised dealers and general information about Transas products and services can be
found at:

www.transas.com

RO5 Page 19 of 34

--- PAGE 20 ---
9.0 Regulatory and Type Approval Information
9.1 Limitations on intended operating environment

The IDP600 series terminal can be used in a wide range of control and monitoring
applications. When third party equipment is attached, such third party equipment and all
cabling must be of suitable design and installation.

Guidance notes for the installation and use of the Ship Security Alert System must be strictly
followed.

Transas exercise due diligence to ensure that the equipment is suitable for use in stated
applications, but ultimate responsibility for the compliance of a complete system must rest
with the prime contractor at a site where local conditions may require additional EMC
precautions be taken.

WARNING: Changes or modifications to this unit not expressly approved by the party

responsible for compliance could void the user's authority to operate this equipment and any
written or implied warranties.

9.2 Compliance
The IDP600 Terminal series obtained the following certifications:

Inmarsat Type Approval

Industry Canada

FCC Part 25

R&TTE Directive 1999/5/EC (CE Mark)
IEC 60945

SSAS Type Ship Guard IDP690 obtained:

Germanischer Lloyd (GL) Certificate of Conformity

R05 Page 20 of 34

--- PAGE 21 ---
10.0 Terminal Specifications
10.1 Physical Dimensions

Overall Size (without mating connector)

IDP-690 126mm x126mm x 101 mm

Weight

460 g

Enclosure Material

Xenoy® 5220U Resin

10.2 Environmental

Operating Temperature Range

-40°to +85° C

Storage Temperature Range

-40°to +85° C

Humidity

90% relative humidity at +85° C

Vibration

SAE J1455, section 4.9.4.2 and MIL-STD-810G

Shock (survival)

MIL-STD-810G, section 516.6

10.3 RF Specifications

Parameter

Value

Frequency Band

Receive 1525 to 1559 MHz
Transmit 1626.5 to 1660.5 MHz

Modulation
0QPSK
Polarization
RHCP
Symbol Rate
Receive 3000 symbols/second
Transmit 900 symbols/second (maximum)
Maximum EIRP

Elevation Angle

IDP-690 Antenna 5dBW

-5 10 +90 degrees

104 GPS

Parameter

Value

Receive Type

GPS C/A Code

Frequency

L1 (1575.42 MHz)

Mean Time to First Fix

Cold Start 36 s
Warm Start 8 s

RO05

Page 21 of 34

--- PAGE 22 ---
Sensitivity

Tracking -146 dBm
Acquisition -136 dBm

Accuracy

Horizontal Position 4 m
Horizontal Speed 0.02 m/s

Heading (50%)

10.5 Compass Safe Distance

Compass Safe Distance, 0.2m —

0.1 degrees

in accordance with ISO 694/2000

R05 Page 22 of 34

--- PAGE 23 ---
11.0 Appendices
11.1  Appendix | - Standard Scope of Supply
1 x Terminal unit comprising:

+ 1x Skywave IDP-600 series terminal

« 1x Polycarbonate mounting box
* 1 x Entry/Exit gland;

1 x Terminal unit mounting bracket (pole mount style)
1 x 25m Power/data cable with hardwired connector
1 x Control unit comprising:

1 x Key barrel with 2 keys

1 x Mounting collar

1 x Contact blocks

1 x ABS plastic mounting box
5 x Entry/exit gland

1 x 30m marine grade 2-core cable for terminal/alert switch connection.

2 x security alert button assemblies comprising:
* Momentary contact push buttons

Contact assemblies

Mounting boxes

Flip-up push button covers

Entry/exit glands

1 x Technical / Installation manual.
1x Set Anti-tamper labels

11.1.1 Optional ltems
1 x Uninterruptible power supply unit - 220Vac in/24Vdc out

R05 Page 23 of 34

--- PAGE 24 ---
11.2 Appendix Il - Schematic and Wiring Diagram

11.2.1 Control Box Connections

SSAS Control Box

elelefelistolefelsfefels

+ VDC
0 vDC
- on
et ()
e ®
=il
o
E
o
L@
4 (€]
8
RSA85 A | 2 RS485 B
P Y P

SkyWave IDP890 Terminal

D3 femaie

Optional

™
R
RS485_h

__ Rs4as B

R05 Page 24 of 34

--- PAGE 25 ---
11.2.2 Pin Out Connections

oONmw=T7

Functionality Pin  Functionality
RS-485/J17083 A 2 RS-485/J1708 B
GND 4 VIN

1/0 02 6 1/0 03

1/0 01 8 1/0 04

RS-232 Tx (Output) 10 RS-232 Rx (Input)

11.3  Appendix lll - SOLAS XI-2 Regulation 6

1 All ships shall be provided with a ship security alert system, as follows;

1
2

ships constructed on or after 1 July 2004;

passenger ships, including high-speed passenger craft, constructed before
1 July 2004, not later than the first survey of the radio installation after 1
July 2004;

oil tankers, chemical tankers, gas carriers, bulk carriers and cargo high-
speed craft, of 500 gross tonnage and upwards constructed before 1 July
2004, not later than the first survey of the radio installation after 1 July
2004;.other cargo ships of 500 gross tonnage and upward and mobile
offshore drilling units constructed before 1 July 2004, not later than the first
survey of the radio installation after 1 July 2006.

2 The ship security alert system, when activated shall;

RO05

initiate and transmit a ship-to-shore security alert to a competent authority
designated by the Administration, which in these circumstance may include
the Company, identifying the ship, its location and indicating that the
security of the ship is under threat or its has been compromised;

Page 25 of 34

--- PAGE 26 ---
2 not send the ship security alert to any other ships;
3 not raise the alarm on board the ship, and;
4 continue the ship security alert until deactivated and/or reset.

The ship security alert system shall;

1 be capable of being activated from the navigation bridge and in at least
one other location, and;

2 conform to performance standards not inferior to those adopted by the
organisation

The ship security alert system activation points shall be designed so as to
prevent the inadvertent initiation of the ship security alert.

The requirement for a ship security alert system may be complied with by using
the radio installation fitted for compliance with the requirements of chapter IV,
provided all the requirements of this regulation are complied with.

when an Administration receives notification of a ship security alert, that
Administration shall immediately notify the State(s) in the vicinity of which the
ship is presently operating.

when a Contracting Government receives notification of a ship security alert from
a ship which is not entitled to fly its flag, that Contracting Government shall
immediately notify the relevant Administration and, if appropriate, the State(s) in
the vicinity of which the ship is presently operating.

RO05

Page 26 of 34

--- PAGE 27 ---
11.4 Appendix IV - MSC Circular 1072

Ref. T2-NAVSEC/2.11 MSC/Circ.1072
26 June 2003

GUIDANCE ON PROVISION OF SHIP SECURITY ALERT SYSTEMS

1

The Sub-Committee on Radiocommunications and Search and Rescue
(COMSAR), at its seventh session (13 to 17 January 2003), taking into account
the urgency and importance of implementing SOLAS regulation XI-2/6 on Ship
Security Alert Systems adopted by the Conference of Contracting Governments
to the SOLAS Convention, 1974 (7-13 December 2002) to be used in the
enhancement of Maritime Security, prepared the guidance on provision of ship
security alert systems.

The Maritime Safety Committee, at its seventy-seventh session (28 May to 6
June 2003), agreed to the proposed guidance regarding Ship Security Alert
Systems, as set out in the annex.

Member Governments are requested to bring the annexed guidance to the
attention of Maritime Administrations, shipmasters, port authorities, port facility
security operators, national authorities responsible for security, shipping
companies, system manufacturers and designers.

I1N\CIRC\MSC\1072.00C

RO05

Page 27 of 34

--- PAGE 28 ---
MSC/Circ.1072

ANNEX
GUIDANCE ON PROVISION OF THE SHIP SECURITY ALERT SYSTEM

1 Regulation 6 of SOLAS chapter XI-2 requires ships to be provided with a ship
security alert system. Section A/9 of the International Ship and Port Facility
Security (ISPS) Code requires ships to carry a ship security plan. Performance
standards for ship security alert systems are given in resolution MSC.147(77).
This Circular gives guidance on the design of ship security alert systems provided
to comply with the SOLAS regulation.

2 The intent of the ship security alert system is to send a covert signal or message
from a ship which will not be obvious to anyone on the ship who is not aware of
the alert mechanism. It is of use therefore in circumstances where a ship wishes
to inform a person ashore of a problem with a minimum number of the persons
onboard aware of the action. The procedures for the security alert are agreed
with the ship.s Administration as part of the ship security plan and ideally should
be individual to the ship. It is not intended that the ship security alert procedures
should be to an internationally agreed standard or conform to any particular
format for all ships.

3 Possible methods of achieving the alert are as follows:

A a system may employ proprietary tracking equipment provided by traffic
service providers. The ship then carries a concealed equipment box
working over a satellite system on its upper deck which transmits a
position report at, typically, 6-hourly intervals. Interruption of power to the
equipment or arming of the equipment by means of sensors or manual
buttons causes the equipment to transmit a different format of position
report. The tracking service providers monitor the transmission reports and
inform the Company when the transmission format changes;

2 a system may utilise modifications of GMDSS equipment.* Some GMDSS
equipment is not very suitable for modification as it is optimised for .all
station. calling and may involve manual setting of frequencies etc and
provides confirmation on the ship of messages sent. In these types of
systems the ship security alert contains identifiers to ensure that it is not
possible to confuse it with a GMDSS distress, urgency or safety alert; and

3 a system may utilise the exchange of messages containing key words
between a ship and, typically, the Company. These messages may be by
speech or data communications. Ship equipment which may be used
includes cellular phones in coastal areas and satellite services away from
coastal areas. It may be possible to use GMDSS VHF/MF/HF equipment in
areas where there are coastal facilities for receiving addressed calls.

This list is not intended as exhaustive and is not intended to inhibit future developments.

(* Inmarsat is developing modifications to existing equipment that will allow for this service to
be implemented.)

I1N\CIRC\MSC\1072.00C

R05 Page 28 of 34

--- PAGE 29 ---
MSC/Circ.1072
ANNEX
Page 2

4 The ship security alert system requires two activation points, one of which should
be on the bridge. These will typically be fixed or portable telephone handsets,
fixed or portable keypads or fixed or portable buttons.

5 Measures should be incorporated in the activation points to avoid their
inadvertent operation and the generation of false alerts.

I1N\CIRC\MSC\1072.00C

R05 Page 29 of 34

--- PAGE 30 ---
11.5 Appendix V - MSC - Resolution 147/77
MSC 77/26/Add.1

ANNEX 7

Page 1

ANNEX 7

RESOLUTION MSC.147 (77)
(Adopted on 29 May 2003)

ADOPTION OF THE REVISED PERFORMANCE STANDARDSFOR A SHIP SECURITY
ALERT SYSTEM

THE MARITIME SAFETY COMMITTEE,

RECALLING Article 28(b) of the Convention on the International Maritime Organization
concerning the functions of the Committee,

RECALLING ALSO resolution A.886 (21), by which the Assembly resolved that the functions
of adopting performance standards for radio and navigational equipment, as well as
amendments thereto, shall be performed by the Maritime Safety Committee on behalf of the
Organization,

RECALLING FURTHER the provisions of the new chapter XI-2 of the International
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS), 1974, as amended, and the requirements
of regulation XI-2/5, that all ships shall be provided with a ship security alert system,

RECOGNIZING that, for security reasons, a ship security alert system is necessary on board
for initiating and transmitting a ship-to-shore security alert to a competent authority
designated by the Administration,

HAVING CONSIDERED the recommendation on revision of resolution MSC.136 (76) made
by the Sub-Committee on Radio communications and Search and Rescue at its seventh
session,

1. ADOPTS the Revised Recommendation on Performance Standards for a Ship
Security Alert System, set out in the Annex to the present resolution;
2. RECOMMENDS Governments to ensure that a ship security alert system:
(a) Ifinstalled on or after 1 July 2004, conforms to performance standards not
inferior to those specified in the Annex to the present resolution;
(b)  Ifinstalled before 1 July 2004, conforms to performance standards not
inferior to those specified in the Annex to resolution MSC.136 (76).

R05 Page 30 of 34

--- PAGE 31 ---
MSC 77/26/Add.1

ANNEX 7

Page 2
ANNEX

REVISED RECOMMENDATION ON PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
FOR A SHIP SECURITY ALERT SYSTEM

1

Introduction

1.1 The ship security alert system is provided to a ship for the purpose of
transmitting a security alert to the shore to indicate to a competent
authority that the security of the ship is under threat or has been
compromised. It comprises a minimum of two activation points, one of
which is on the navigation bridge. These initiate the transmission of a ship
security alert. The system is intended to allow a covert activation to be
made which alerts the competent authority ashore and does not raise an
alarm on board ship nor alert other ships.

1.2 Asrequired by its Administration, the competent authority receiving the
alert notifies the authority responsible for maritime security within its
Administration, the coastal State(s) in whose vicinity the ship is presently
operating, or other Contracting Governments.

1.3 The procedures for the use of the ship security alert system and the
location of the activation points are given in the ship security plan agreed
by the Administration.

1.4 The ship security alert system may utilise the radio installation provided for
compliance with chapter IV of the SOLAS Convention, other radio systems
provided for general communications or dedicated radio systems.

General

2.1 Inaddition to complying with the general requirements set out in resolution
A.694 (17/1), the ship security alert system should comply with the:
following performance standards.

2.2 The radio system used for the ship security alert systems should comply
with relevant international standards.

Power supply

3.1 Where the ship security alert system is powered from the ship’s main
source of electrical power, it should, in addition, be possible to operate the
system from an alternative source of power.

Activation points

4.1 Activation points should be capable of being used on the navigation bridge
and in other locations. They should be protected against inadvertent
operation. It should not be necessary for the user to remove seals or to
break any lid or cover in order to operate any control.

(17/1 Publication IEC60945.)

RO05

Page 31 of 34

--- PAGE 32 ---
MSC 77/26/Add.1
ANNEX 7

Page 3

5 Operation

5.1

52

The activation points should operate a radio system such that transmission
of the security alert does not require any adjustment of the radio system,
i.e. tuning of channels, setting of modes or menu options. Operation of the
activation point should not cause any alarm or indication to be raised on
the ship.

The operation of the ship security alert system should not impair the
functionality of the GMDSS installation.

6 Transmission of security alerts

6.1 Inall cases, transmission initiated by security alert system activation points
should include a unique code/identifier indicating that the alert has not
been generated in accordance with GMDSS distress procedures. The
transmission should include the ship identity and current position
associated with a date and time. The transmission should be addressed to
a shore station and should not be addressed to ship stations.

6.2 The ship security alert system, when activated, should continue the ship
security alert until deactivated and/or reset.

7 Testing
7.1 The ship security alert system should be capable of being tested.

RO05

Page 32 of 34

--- PAGE 33 ---
11.6 Appendix VI - Inmarsat Satellite Coverage

[EEEEREEREER)

P s P e P eneencic

11.7 GL Certificate of Conformity

RO5 Page 33 of 34

--- PAGE 34 ---
BpeAprowd Grtficte

Germanischer Lloyd

This is to certfy that the undemoted product(s) has/have been tested in accordance with
the relevant requirements of the GL Type Approval System.

Ceftficate No.
Company

Product Description
Type

Environmental Category
Technical Data
Range of Application

5972813 HH
Transas Marine International AB

Datavigen 37
43632 Askim, SWEDEN

Ship Security Alert System
Ship Guard IDP630
C;F (transceiver); EMCT

Ship Security Alert System (SSAS) equipment with an integral GPS recelver using
the Inmarsat Machineto-Machine service consisting of:

- Skywave transceiver IDP-690 (IsatData Pro);
~terminal box Transas type 18 088 0
- control box Transas type 18 088 001;
~securlty alert button Transas type 16 083 002.

Power Supply : 9V DCto 32V DC

Degree of protection: IP67 (transceiver)

.0.7 or later; Script version: 1.02 or later.

Tests and evidence according to Requirement Class 1.

Test Standard IMO Res. MSC.147(77), A.694(17); IMO MSC/Circ.1072; IEC 60345 (2002);
Guidelines for the Performance of Type Approvals, Chapter 2 (2012-08).

Documents Test report : Nemko 17609-1R2TRFEMC, 179609-1TRFSAF, 179609-1TRFWL;
Mariner Systems TL1585, TL1585-ENV; Inmarsat Cert. IDPSWI003, IDPISWI004.
Documents: TechnicallUser Guide, Ed. A, Rev. 01.

Remarks None

Valid until 2018-01-14

Page 10f1 Type Approval Symbol @

File No. LE03

Hamburg, 2013-01-15

Germanischer Lloyd Marco Rinkel Hartmut Kuhn

s corfcate s s on he basis of‘Regulaons o he Perfomance f Type Tests,Part 0, Procadur.

Intamet Publicaton: GLApprovals

RO05

Page 34 of 34
