FILE: E-301 INSTRUCTION BOOK FOR MAIN GENERATOR.pdf
FOLDER: .
DATE: 2026-03-06 20:41:26.848547
==================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
FINISHED PLAN

FLANDERS TENACITY

MANAGER

INSTRUCTION BOOK FOR
MAIN GENERATOR

--- PAGE 2 ---
INSTRUCTION MANUAL
FOR
BRUSHLESS A C. GENERATOR

(MODEL: FE:FLEK)

TR — G

--- PAGE 3 ---
e po

INSTHUCTION MANUAL FOR BRUSHLESS A.€. GENERATORS

CONTENTS

INTROBUCT10N 1
OUTLINE 1
OUTLINE OF THE EXCITING SYSTEN 2
GENBRATOR CONSTRUCTION 3
4-1 Stator 3
4-2 Rator 4
4-3 Bearings 6
4-4 Ventilation 8
4-5 A.C. Exciter 8
4-8 Rotary Rectificr 9
4-T Space Heater 9
4-8 Air Filter 9

EXCITING SYSTEM
5-1 Bxciting Operation

5-2 Construction and Function of the Static
L O
OPERATION
6-1 Preparation for Running

6-2 During Running ooccsesesssssrsrssssssme i

6-3 Parallel Bunning
HATNTENANCE

7-1 Periodical Inspection

7-2 Maintenance Procedures
TROUBLESHOOTING

8-1 Trouble Causes and Countermeasures
DISASSEMBLY & ASSEMBLY  ------o--ooomeesers

9-1 General Precautions

9-2 Disassembling and Assembling Procedures

--- PAGE 4 ---
1. INTRODUCTION
TAIY0 brushless a.c. genarators hzve been designed so as to fulill various

lews, regulations, 2nd standards upen the basis of aur company’s long years of

oducticn of marine gencrators and in cereful considaration of
electricai. mechanical and other overational reyvirements for verives zarine
conditions. Just as careful considerations and tiwely medical examinations are
necessary lo maintain human health, adetuate periodical inspection und
maintenance work is indispensable for any generator to display the best
performance for a long time.

Habitual proper handling will keep Lhe geuerator in optimal conditions at
all times.

2. OUTLINE

The brushless a.c. generator canses the cutput current of a rotary armature
type a c. exciler mousted on the shaft of the main gemerator to excite the field
system of the main gezerator through a rolary rectifier, thus generating a.c.
DotEr.

2-1 The genarators are clessified into the following medels eccording to
hausing configuration and protecting system.

{2) Model TE Drip-proof. protected. with sleeve hearings in
end brackels, oil ring fubrication, witha
buili-in exciter

(3) Model FE{  Drip-proof, protected. with slfeeve bearings in
end brackets, forced [ubrication, wilh a huilt-in
exciter

2-2 The siatic exciling system is composed of a current transformer, a

rectifier, & surge prolector, a power transformer,ete.formaliy, iis main

compoaeats are mounted as a unil on top of lhe generelor.

--- PAGE 5 ---
3. OUTLINE OF THE EXCITING SYSTEM

The basic circuit composition of this brushless gene. is shown in Fiz. 3-1.

The output current of the revolving-armature type AC exciter installed on
the shaft of the rolating machine of the main generator excites the field system
of the main generatot through the rotary rectifier on the shaft.

Also, the exciting current of the AC exciter is taken out as the exciting
current for obtaining compound charac teristics [rom part of the output of the
main generator through the static exciter or current transformer (CT) and the
reactor (RT). This is then transformed into DC by the silicon rectifier (81) to
excite the field system of the AC exciter,

The output of the CT and the RT is then preset at overcompensation for
maintaining the terminal voltage of the generator at a comslani level,

This is controlled by the automatic voltage regulator (AVE) which
constitutes the diversion system.

Fs
G: Main generator Ex: A.C. exciter Siy: Rotary rectifier
Siz: Silicon rectifier  Si z: Surge protector Fy: Main generator field system
Fz: Bx  field winding CI: Gurreni transformer
CCT: Current transformer for cross-current compensation
RT: Reactor
VE: Rhieostat for voltage setting AVR: Automatic voltage regulator

Fig.3-1 Basic Circuil Diagram

--- PAGE 6 ---
4. CGBNERATCR CONSTRUCT(ON

As shown in the strusturel drawings (Fig. 9-1 -3) :ke ecacrater is ccmposed

mainly of a stalor frame, stztor core, stalor winling. field core. [ield winding,
shalt, bearirgs. a.c. exciter, rotary rectifier, and so forth.

Cooling zir is teken in by the fan fitted to the rotor on ihe driven side
through the ventilation port on the non-coupling side, and passes over the
sarfaces o the fieid core anc coil eads and ihrough the air ducts arranged in
the stator core and [ield core, thus effectively ahsorbing the heat generated uy

thon.  The fMeated air is let out of the generator through the ventilation port

on the coupling side.

Tae a.c. exciter overhangs or is incorporated in tke gencraior on the nen-
coupling side. The rotary rectifier is also mounted ou the same side to supply
an exciting current io the field winding of :he generator

4-1 Slator

“he stztor frame is consiructed of weldsd mild sieel plates, beivg so
designed as ‘¢ have sufficient mechanical sirength and to withstand electric
shack.  The stator corz is provided as follows: silicon steel plate which is

good in magnetic characteristics and coated with an insulaiing varnish fo

prevention of eddy current is punched, and the punched plate elements arc
piled along tae iemcr circumference of the slator [rame [rom onc side end
ecuipped with air duct zt each of reguiar oile intervels. The core thus
formed is forced in and fastened by stator clampers made of sieel plate.

The stator wiading is formed of electric wire of insulation class * F ",
and placed in the slots which have been formed in the inner geriphery of the
stator core and protected with an insulating material of class * 7. The
winding thus piaced
then subjected to sufficienat va

astered to Lie stator core by special wedges and

impregnaticn zné drvice. The outward

appearance of the stator is showa in Fig. 4-1

--- PAGE 7 ---
Fig. 4-1 Stator

4-2 Rotor
The field core is made up of laminations of a material having an

exceedingly high coercive force for ease of voltage self-establishment, The

laminated core is Fitted into the shaft {or the spider) and clamped at both

ends by means of rotor clampers, and serves also to protect the winding,
The field core has such cross-sectional configuration as illusirated in

Fig. 4-2.

Pole center Damoer bar Pols center

Slot

Jemper ber

Air haole

Rig. 4-2 {(Core for 8 poles illustrated)

--- PAGE 8 ---
The slols in whieh the field coiis are Lo be placed are formed in a nuuber
of slot groups which cerrespoads Lo he vumber of poles. The pole center
iig. 4-2.

The damper bars are previded only in renerators for paraliel running. The
damper ber is wound in ¢

exists beiween slot groups as shown :

er of the two mamoers skown in Fig. 4-2 (&) and (b).
The field winding is formed of electric wire of insulation class “F”
and placed in the slots furnisked with a class “F " insulating material
The coils placed in the slots are fixed firmly to the field cere by special
wedges and subjected to sulficienl varnish impregnation and drying
The c¢ail ends ave bound by piano wire or special tepe sc as noi to move
out by ceatrifugal force. The external appearance of the rotcr is as shown in
Fig. 4-3. The shaft is made of en excelleni forged steel material in careful

ideration of mechanical sirength. For the generator to be directly
coupled to a diescl enzime, special attention has been paid to prevention of
shzft breakage cue to torsional vibration, in our incessart close consultation
viith the engine man:facturer as to tectnical items comcerning the coupling.

Fig. 4-3 Exleraal 4ppearance of the Rotor

--- PAGE 9 ---
4-3 Bearings

The bearings is sleeve bearings.

The sleeve hearings are each split in two for convenience of disasscmbly
and reassembly. Supported by the lower portiens of end brackels and cases
the bearings have sufficient siremgth to withstand external forces, axial load,
and vibration,

Figs. 4-4 to 4-6 show bearing constructions.
4-3-1 Three lubrication systems are employed.

(1) 0il ring Iubrication (odel FE)
(2)  Torced lubrication (Models FEK)
Note: The stator cores of our generators are not of the sector type, so
that no harmful shaft current may occur. lowever, only large size
generators (with pedestals) are provided, on the non-coupling side,

with insulating means for shaft current prevention,

911 faading plug

Oil vig,

Roil aratn 51w

Fig. 4-4 Bearing Construction
Employing 0il Ring
Lubrication

--- PAGE 10 ---
Fig, 4-6 Bearing Employing Forced Lublication
(Left: Lower portion Right: Upper portion)

Fig. 4-5 Bearing Bmploying 011 Ring Lubrication
(Left: Lower portion Right: Upper portion)

--- PAGE 11 ---
4-4 Ventilation
In the generator of the enclosed and self-ventilated lype, the fan fitted
to the rotor on the non-driven side causes cooling air to be drawn in through
the ventilation port on the non-coupling side and to pass over the surfaces of
the stator core and the coil ends and through the air ducts provided within
the stator core and the field core. Thus. the air effectively reccives heat
generated by these components and then flows out through the vest port on the
coupling side.
The ventilation porls are provided with sufficient protecting means for
protection of the human body and against the eniry of foreign solid objects.

4-5 A.C. Exciter

The a.c. exciter is of the rotating armature type and located on the
non-coupling side of the generator. The exciter is composed mainly of a
slalor frame, field core, field windings, armature core, armature winding, etc.

4-5-1 Stator

The stator frame is constructed of cast iron and welded mild steel
plates, being so designed as to have satisfactory rigidity and strength,

The field core is made by placing laminations of a material having
excellent magnetic characteristics in the stator frame, In the field core
slots in which the field winding is to be placed are formed in a number of
slot groups which corresponds to the number of poles.

The field winding is formed of electric wire of insulation class F and
placed in the slots formed along the periphery of tle field core and
furnished with an insulating waterial of the employed class. The winding
put in the slots is subjected to sufficient varnish impregnation and
drying and fastened to the field core by wedges

4-5-2 Rotor

The armature core (rotor core) is provided as follows. Silicon steel
plate of high quality which is coated with an insulating varnish for
prevention of cddy current is punched, and the puached plate elements are
piled on the shaft and fasteaed by end plate. The armature winding is
formed of electric wire of insulation class F and placed in the slots
furnished with an insulating matcrial of the employed class. The winding
thus put in the slots is fixed to the armature core by wedges and subjected
to sufficient varnish impregnation and drying

The coil ends are bound by pianc wire or a special sort of tape so as
not to meve out by centrifugal force

--- PAGE 12 ---
4-6 Rotary Rectifier

The rotary rectifier is fitted to the generator shaft.
Two conductive plates are attached to a rotary rectifier boss through an
insulating plate. The cenductive plates carry silicen rectifiers for each
phase, a silicon carbide varistor (Silistor) for surge prevention and other
parts, Thesc components serve for three-phase full wave rectification of the
a.c. output of the a.c. exciter to supply a d.c. exciting current to the field
winding of the generator.

4-T Space lleater

The generator windings may absorb moisture while the generator is at rest.
In order fo prevent this moisture absorption, it is necessary to keep the
temperature within the resting gemerator a little higher than the ambient
temperature, A space heater is provided to satisfy this requirement.

The space heater is
located at the lower portion
of the generator frame so that
the heated air circulates in
the generator to scrve effec-
tively to protect the windings
and the related parts from
moisture, Terefore, when it
is intended to keep the
generator at rest, be sure to
turn on the power switch for
the space heater. When

starting the generator, be
sure to cut off the power
supply to the spacc heater.
The outward appearance of fig. 4-7 Space lieater
the mounted space heater is

shown in Fig. 4-T,

4-8 Bir Filter

When a drip-proof, pratected type generator is vquipped with an air filter,
it is located at the cooling air suction port so as to minimize the entry of
dust, oil vapor and other foreign watter into the generator, so that the
generator interior can be kept cleaner than otherwise,

--- PAGE 13 ---
5. EXCITING SYSTEM
The basic circuit diagram of he brushless a.c. gemerator is as shown in

Fig. 3-1.
5-1 Exciting Operation

5-1-1 Exciting circuit
Understanding the principles of the wperation is important for correct
operation of the generator and for early detection of the cause of failure
as well as for the performance of the appropriate ropair work.
Fig. 5-1 shows the excitation circuit of this generator.
This systen converts the output current of the AC exciter installed on
the shafl of the main generator, into DO, This is performed by the rotary

rectifier and conscquently excites the field system of the main geperator.

RTG

AVR

Fig. §-1

Exciting the AC rectifier is performed by taking cut part of the
output of the main generator as excitation current by the reactor (RT) and
the current transformer (CT).

This is to say that the excitation current compensates for the
terminal vollage at the no-load condition, This excitation current is
obtained from the RT and compensates for voltage drops by leak resistance
with the armature reaction caused by load current at load beign obtained
from CT.

5-1-2 MR circuit
The AVR circuit consists of the deviaiion delecting, power saurce
P.L.D., phasc control, and main thyristor, as shown in fig. 5-2. part of
the deviation detecting circuit, P.I.D. circuit, and the phase control
circuit, are incorporated into a printed circuil board and enclosed in a

box with the detecting transformer RI1 and main thyristor.

10

--- PAGE 14 ---
" STATIC EXCITER
INPUT VOLTAGE

poier
source
input
detecting Power Synchronize
input source controling
circuil circuit |
setting ' !
Voltage |
]
deviation P.I.D. Phase main
?| detecting 3 control 3 thyristor
circuit cireuit circuit circuit
our PUT

Fig 5-2 AVR Block Diagram

The deviation detecting circuit gencrates the detected input

proportional voltage Bl which is proportional to the detccted inmpul

voltage EG and d-c converted to a proper magnitude and the reference

voltage 2 which is independent of EG and always constant, and provides
the deviation voltage B3 (= Bl 4 E2).

11

--- PAGE 15 ---
VR

detecting CCT setting voltage
input —
L Ak pe -
i phase control power source
P.I.D. circuit circuit i circuit B
s r b : G- R Rat
€5 RS * R b2 )
Ml “H 1 - ALies ,
A DI |Rri — H Ris R 22
ey e B e [ks a
_an‘g U Ja c RZ}E el R ¢ A - —E(i7“ﬁ Cia
g | u 3 1 §
| ST T T [ = :
AL Al u AL s T kL 11,
: 1 3 ; GOl 3 ]R3 fu —®
& deviation L[ ) ! ? o
= detecting circuit c3 Gt 11, . L - o @ i
= ' H z4
2 L [
a = G J
3 u 12
v : synchroniz-
) [®  pover sourse i ooniroling circult
. Ds circuit s % '——I;;@
22
earth jr,,z T :R!U R 5}:1 D3
® AA-D48 ; [ = P ¥ R
- . = 3 o 3] L
- 5 hd
A R i<z l D12 ' Yee R & Lcu ©
static jexchter 5CRY e WPTEy y o Py ; Al
;glﬁg am Gi sk —‘]] H:———(gu 1l Is o) Rize
® "“'iw F (VT 'V O M
B A o 13 i
: o) A vl (-
main thyristor circuit G KiGz 2
L 1 -

--- PAGE 16 ---
Es

Deteeting input
Voltage EG(%)

Ez
(=E1+E2)

Ex

Fig. 5-4 detecting input Voltage EG-El, B2, E3

The relation between EG, BI, E2 and E3 is shown in Fig. 5-4.

Vain parts of the P.I.D. circuit is using op amp. The deviation
signal B3 is amplified by the operational amplifier in this P.1.D. circuil
and the amplified deviation signal [’3 is converted into a single pulse
controlled, in the phase contrel circuit in the phase refation as shown in

Fig. 5-5.

Phase
engle
«

9.5 16 W)
Deviation signal E's
Fig. 5-5 deviation signal '3 - phase anglex

In this circuit, RI2 is a variable resistor regulating the AVR gain,
and in case output vollage is un-stable, turn this resistor to control

clockwise dircction until getting stable output voltage.
The P.1.D. & synchronize-coniroling circuit resistor has set most

suitable point at our factory.
In this circuit, variable resistors B3, R9 and R35 must not turn.

13

--- PAGE 17 ---
5-2 Construction and Function of the Static Exciter

The static exciting system is composed of a reactor- ®RT), current
transformer {C1), silicon rectifier (Si), semiconductor automatic voltage
regulator (4YR), etc. Normally, the voltage regulator (VR), parts for
parallel running are installed in the switchboard as shown in Fig. 5-8, while
the other parts are placed in a box (Fig. 5-7) of drip-proof construction
nounted on the top of the generator.

A. C. GENERATOR&EXCITER SWITCH BOARD

B %H, Ac 14
sPACE HEATER cT =

fosne

iy 512
Iy
e 5
T,
Symbol Part name Symbiol Part name Symbol Part name
Current
Cr RT Reactor
transformer
. | o . . . L SiC varistor
Siy | Silicon rectifier Siz Silicon rectifjer S L
(Silistor)
$iC varistor
former for cross- Sz .
current (Silistor)

‘R fonat i€ vol tag R
Re | Resistor VYoltage regulator

Jopulat

G A.C. generator Ex | A.C. exciter

Fig. 5-6 Part in suitchboard

14

--- PAGE 18 ---
VAYE OF PARTS

CT | CURRENT TRANSFORMER
SIDE COVER

| s. | siLision

DRIP PROOT COVER |
WAIK TURHINAL
|1 CABLE SUPPOR
AU, TRRMLVAL
FRAITE

SILICON RECTIFIER
DISCHARGE RESISTOR
| mr |meactor
12 CABLE GLANDS

@

= =
S E NN NNEEE

Fig 5-7 Bxciting Unit Nounted oa Generator Top

5-2-1 Components of the static exciter
() Reactor D

The outsard appearance of the reactor is as shown in Fig 5-8.
The core is provided with clearances in which magnetic insulators are
inserted.
The role of the reactor in the exciting system is such that the
cxciting current componcnt required to maintain the rated voltge when
the generator is under no load is supplied to the field winding of the
generator from the output of the gemerator through the reactor and the
silicon rectifier.

15

--- PAGE 19 ---
Fig. 5-8 Beactor

Current transformer (CT)

The outward appearance of the current transformer is as shown in

Fig. 5-9. It has a core provided with the primary and secondary
windings.

The role of the current transformer in the exciting system is such
that the exciting current component required to compensate for the
voltage drop due to the armature reaction and leakage reactance caused
by load current is supplied to the field winding of the generator from

the sccondary winding through the silicon rectifier.

Fig. 5-9 Current Traoasformer

16

--- PAGE 20 ---
(3) Silicon rectifier and protecting device (Silister)
Tae outward appearance of the silicon rectilier (8i) is as shown in
Fig. 5-10(a}. The rectifier elemect, by mature, tends to pass
electric current only in one direction and almost no current in the
cpposite direction. {(See Fig. 910 (0).)
The silicon rectifi

1 has a peak reverse voltage and would be damaged

by the apolicaticn of an overveltage ch exceeds Lhe peak reverse

voltage. Therefore, ihe silicon rectifier must be used together with

a protecting device against overvoltage (surge voltages).

Forward
voltage

T Reverse
j currenz

| Reverse

- {e)

{a}

(b)

Fig. 5-10 Silicon Rectifier

Should there te no protecting device, the silicon input voltage might
become an overvcltags nearly 10 tizes as high as ife rating wen the
generater is shorl-circuited, for cxample.  Sou, as show: in F!

5-11 (b3, a Silistor (S) is. as protector, coanzeted fc the silicon
rectifier on its d.c. side so that the peak reverse voltage will not
be exceeded during overvol6‘age conditions

[he vutward appearuvce of the Silistor is as shown in Fig. 5-11 {a).
The Silistor is a varistor mace of silicon carbide.

As shown in Fig. 5 11 (c), as the voltage applizd to the Sifistor
decreases, its resislance increases non-linearly, and vice versa, so
that it serves effectively for overveltage zbsorpiion.

The chavacteristic of this non-lirear varistor is syumetric i respect
af the polarity reversing point.

When an vervoltage is going to act on the silicon rectifier, the

Silistor abruptly lowars in resistance te pass much curreat, thus

attenuating the excessive cutrect and protecting the silicon rectifier.

17

--- PAGE 21 ---
81
s o~
| o~
U ORI
TR Neprvive S Poritive
) HVT TiTTage

Fig, 5-11 Protector (Silistor)

{§) Semiconductor automatic voltage regulator (AVR) and voltage regulator
R
The semiconductor AVR ensures high stability and high performance
against generator core saturation,
field temperature change, and
frequency variation,
For details, refer to the preced-
ing subsection (5-1).

(a) AVR and voltage regulator (b) Printed circuit board
Fig. 5-12

18

--- PAGE 22 ---
6. DPERATION

When operating the gemerator. practice the following :iers completely in

order to ensure s

ety and to elongate the 1iZeline of the machine

Ckeck for ary foreign maller, irom [ragments. loose screws. etc. Shocld

tais check be neglected, there might oceur serious damage to the gemerator

during operating conditions

6-1 Preparation for Ruaning
(1) Tnstalled condition

(2) Terminal section

(3) Insulation resistance

Bearing section

Check if the coupling hus been done at the
preper position

Check if the clampivg bolts are fully
tightened.

[aspect :he lead wires for any flaw or
crack in their coatings

Check for surc termination ‘reatment and
correct teruinal codes and phases.
Check for loose bolts and nuts in ile

terninal section.

Measure the insulation resistence betwaen
ezch of the windings of the generator and
ground with & 500 V megger.

It is desirable that the measured
resistance is above ane MQ.

(For details, refer to T-2-5 cleanicg

and drying of winding)

a order Lo aveid applying the wegger
voltage to the AVR, be sure to disconnect
or short the terminals prior o measure-
ment.

In Lhe cese of the il ring :ubrication
system. make stre ibat the lubricating oil
is supplied up to ‘he red ling mark of the
0il gauge (Fig. T-1).

19

--- PAGE 23 ---
6-2  During Running

6-2-1

When operating a new generator, do so under no load or at low speed.

Meanwhile, inspect components as to temperature, vibration, sound, ete.

Y]
@
&)
@
@

6-2-2

Sleeve bearing oil ring rolation

Sbnormal sound in the bearing sectien

Abnormal vibration

Temperature rise in the bearing section......... (Be careful when The
tewperature exceeds 85°C.)

Rapid temperature rise

Yonitoring of the generator panel
At the time of testing at factory, adjustmenis are made in relation to

power factor change, rotating speed change, load variation, clc., so that,

when the rated rotating speed is approached, the voltage will build up

within  £1.0% of the rated veltage. Therefore, there is no need to

control the veltage regulator.

6-2-3
oY)
@)

&

Others

Temperature risc in components (Refer to the test record.)

Check to confirm that the readings of the meters on the switchboard
are always below the values specified on the name plates (especially,
output, voltage, and current).

Check if the bearings are properly lubricated.

6-3 Parallel Ruaning

For parallel running of generators, refer to the following operating

principles and procedures. Erroneous handling may cause a generator failure.

6-3-1
jo¥]

@

Requirements for parallel rumning

In order Lo operate a generator in parailel with another generafor in
operation, it is necessary for both generators to satisfy the
following conditions:

(® To be identical in frequency.

@ To be equal in voltage magnitude.

(€) To be matched in phase.

Conditions required of the prime movers

(8) To have uniferm angular velocities.

(®) To have an adequate speed regulation.

20

--- PAGE 24 ---
®]

6-3-2
o)}

@

In case the above-mentioned conditions are not satisfied, the

following undesirable phenonena and situations will take place.

(&) In case there is no matching in phase, much cross current will
flow, and closing for parallel running will be impossible.

@ Any difference in voltage wagnitude will cause a flow of cross
current hetween the generators, so that the generators with
higher and Iower vollagos will have lagging and leading currests
respectively, and thus reactive power shedding will be impossible.

() If the generator load characteristics do not include u drooping
characteristic with respect fo reactive power, stable shedding of
reactive power is impossible, and this may give rise to hunting
or step-out.

() In case the angular speed is not uniform, Ioad shedding can not
be performed. The prime mover is provided with an adequately
sized flywheel for angular velocity uniformity.

(E) Without governor characteristics, load shedding is not stable.
{F) If the governor speed characteristics do not include stability or
quick response, just as in the case of (B) load shedding is

unstable, or hunting or step-out may result.

Synchronizing

Carry out governor adjustment on the prime mover side until

the frequency of the generator to be connected in parallel

with the forerunning generator js approached.

While watching the synchronizing lamps or synchroscope, finely

adjust the governor, and close the circuit breaker at the

point of synchronism.

() As to the synchronizing lamps, the time when one of the lamps has
gone off and the two others have become brightest is the phase
coincidence point.

(B) As to the synchroscope, the time when the needle has come to the
top center is the phase coincidence point.

(C) It is a proper method to start the clesing operation with the
closing time of the circuit breaker taken into account, and to
close the circuit breaker just ai the point of synchronism (when
the needle of the synchroscope has come to the top center).

z1

--- PAGE 25 ---
6-3-3 Load shedding
&f ter completion of synchronizing, while paying attention {o frequency,
operate the governor on the forerunning generator side in the speed
lowering direction and operate the goversor on the after-running generator
side in the speed raising dircction, By so doing, make a gradual load
shift for load shedding.

9-3-4 Release from parallel operalion
When disconnecting one of the generators ruaning in parallel [row the
bus, take the following steps:

(1) Operate the governor of the driver for the generator to be released
in the speed lowering direction and operate the governor of the driver
for the generator on the bus side in the speed raising direction for
load shifting,

(2) When the load on the generator to be relsased becames zera, trip the
circuit breaker for the same generator.

22

--- PAGE 26 ---
7. KAINTENANCE

T-1 Periodical Inspection

In order for any machine to perform its full function, the operator is

required to deal with the machine with a correct knowledge of it and always to

take good care of if.

minimize troubles.

7-1-1

imporlant,

n

@

@

@

6]

Daily inspection

Proper and effective maintenance work will prevent or

Baily checks and monitoring during generator operation are most

The rouline checking points are as [ollows:

Sound (Check components for abnormal sound by a sound
locating rod.)

Offensive smell (Delect any abnormality by offensive odor

emitted from burnt or charred varnish, oil, etc.)

Temperature rise (Check the temperatures of various parts by

thermometer. )

Vibration (Check for vibration by using a vibrometer or

touching by hand,)

Bearing conditions (Check for the amount and pressure of oil, oil

Ting rotation, and any oil leakage.)

7-1-2~ Honthly inspoction

m

@

&)}

A.1-3
[}

Insulation resistance measurement (For slator, rotor, cxciting

Check of lubricating oil

Cleaning and inspection

Inspection of fastemers

Semiannual inspection and care
Replacement of lubricating oil

Check of electric wiring

23

equipment, etc.)

(Check lubricating oil for
excessive deterioration or toe much
dust contained. If so, replace.)
(Renove the cover, and inspect the
coils for excessive dust deposition.
If so, clean. Where a filter is
used, check it and clean as
necessary.)

(Retighten. Check, particularly,

terminal areas.)

(Check for insulation and any
damage.)

--- PAGE 27 ---
(D Check of exciting cguipment ° (Visually inspect terminal parts,
and check the silicon rectifier.}

7-2 Maintcnance Procedures
For maintenance of components, take proper steps referring to the

following description.

7-2-1 Temperature rise
The monitoring of the temperatures of devices is an effective means
for finding faulls, if any.
Check temperature rise in components by referring to Table 7-1.

Table 7-1 A&llowable Temperature Rise Limits ()
(Standard ambient temperaturc: 50°C)

. . Allowable temperature rise fimit
Machine part Heasuring method " -
Insulation Tnsulation
class B class F
Armature winding By thermometer 60 %
(Gencrator stator
winding) By resistance 70 B 9%
Field winding of
e. ) e By resistance 80 100
cylindrical rotor
Core or other
machine parts adja-
i By thermemeter 70 a0
cent to insulated
winding
. Khen measured by temperature detector
Bearing . 35
clenent embedded in metal:

For reference: 1. Where the standard ambient temperature (air
temperature) is 45°C or 40°C instead of 50°C, the
difference between them should be added to the
temperature risc limits specified in Table 7-1.

2. When LR, GL and NV standards are applied, the
temperature rise linits shown in Table 7-1 are for

the standard ambient temperature of 457C.

24

--- PAGE 28 ---
7-2-2 ‘Bearings and lubrication
For the mechanical function of the generator, the bearings and related
paris are particularly important. So, they should be main-tained with
mich care.
(1) Sleeve bearings
(a) 0il ring lubrication system
1> The main probable causes for abnormal and burnt bearings are as
follows:
i) Insufficient oil amount
ii) Improper oil ring rotation
) Defective direct coupling
iv) Excessive vibration
)

Use of faulty oil which contains dirts

|
Bee 1w B G '
Upper
Mmic Fig, 7-1
Lower
| Timit
L
T g

2) In order that ample lubricating oil may be carried over the shaft
by the oil ring, it is necessary to supply oil in the oil box up
to the red line marked on the oil gauge.

The upper and lower limits of the oil level are § mm above and 5
nm below the red line mark of the oil zauge, respectively

(Fig. 7-1).

Keep the bearing clean, and check for the lubricating condition
(oil level) on a daily basis.

3) In case there is an excessive amount of lubricating oil, the oil
may flow out along the shaft. On the contrary, when the oil
amount is too small, the bearing is in danger of being burnt.

&) Check the bearings on a daily basis, and pay attention to any
rapid temperature rise.

The maximum bearing temperature during normal operating conditions
is on the order of 80 to 85 (thermometer reading)

5) In case a bearing is overheated, do not stop the rotation of the
shaft suddenly but keep on the rotation. and while feeding oil
continuously so that oil flows between the shaft and the bearing,
decrease the rotating si:ced gradually, alloning for a cooling time
and thereafter stop the generator,

In case the shaft rotatien is stopped abruptly without taking the

25

--- PAGE 29 ---
6
®)
n

2

3

4

]

adove described step, the shaft and the bearing metal will fuse
together so that the repair will be very difficult.
When a bearing has been burnl or worn, replace it with a good one.
Forced lubrication system

he main probable causes for abnormal and burnt bearings are as
follows:

i) Pressure below the specified value

ii) Defective direct coupling
iii) Bxcessive vibration

iv) Use of faulty oil which contains dirts

v) Oiling pipe clogged with dirts
During operation, make sure that the pressure gauge provided at
the o0il fecding port reads the specilied pressure. and peep
through the oil sight to confirm that lubricating oil is flowing.
Keep the bearings clean, and check for the lubricating condition
on a daily basis,
When the pressure of the lubricating oil for the bearings has
decreased and if operation is carried on with the decrease not
ascertained, the bearings will overheat and may be burnt.
Check the bearings on a daily basis, and pay attention to any
rapid temperature rise.
The maximum bearing temperature during normal operating conditions
is on the order of 80 - 85 (thermometer reading).
In casc a bearing is overheated, do not stop the rotation of the
shaft suddenly but keep en the retation, and while feeding oil
continuously so that oil flows between the shaft and the bearing,
decrease the rotating speed gradually, allowing for a cooling time
and thereafter stop the generator.
In case the shaft rotation is stopped abruptly without taking the
above described step, the shaft and the bearing metal will fuse
together so that the repair will be very difficult.
When a bearing has been burnt or worn, replace it with a good one.

@) Lubrication oil

(a)
1

2

0il ring lubrication system

The type of lubricating oil to be employed is ISD G 48
(equivalent to JIS K 2238).

Choose a lubricating oil of high quality for the bearings.

The oil must be filtered so as not to contain impurities.

The frequency of oil change depends on the ambient conditions,

that is, the room temperature, ambient cleanness, frequency of use,

and so forth, However, normally replace lubricating oil once

26

--- PAGE 30 ---
@)

about every six months,
Nevertheless, this does not apply at the early stage of using the
generator or when there is any abnormality. In such a case,
replace the Iubricating oil with clean oil according to the
conditions.
(L) Forced lubrication system
1) Use either of the following types of lubricating oil which is
reconmended by our cowpany:
With a generator (of 6 or more poles) coupled with a diesel
engine:
SAE No. 30 (equivalent o No. 2 of JIS K 2215 class &)
+ With a generator (of 4 or 6 poles) coupled with a turbine
engine:
Turbine 0il No. 180 (equivalent to JIS K 2213 No 1SO VG-68)
2) Choose a lubricating oil of high quality for the bearings.
The oil must be filtered so as not to contain impurities.

The fitting of the shaft and bearing
When replacing a bearing, take the following steps:
Clean the surface of the bearing and apply minium well mixed with
machine oil onto the bearing portion of the shaft thinly and uniformly.
Engage the hearing with the shaft by bolting., Then rotate the shaft
several turns and remove the bearing, Deposited minium will be found
on the projections of the inside surface of the removed bearing.
Remove the minium-carrying projections with a scraper. Repeat this
fitting procedure until the shaft fits the bearing uniformly,
(Fig. 7-2)
To check the clearance of the bearing, measure the outside diameter of
the shaft and the inside diameter of the bearing at several points by
micromeler,
1f the bearing clearance calculated by the following formula is
exceeded, replace the bearing.
1000
Where C= Bearing upside clearance (mm)
D= Shaft diameter (mn)

C = DBx

+ 0.1

21

--- PAGE 31 ---
Fig. 7-2 Bearing Fitting

7-2-4 HMaintenance of the air filter

Periodically check the air filter, and if the filter is very dirty,

regenerate it by the following procedure:

¥

@

@)

HKaterial

The air filter is made of nylon and heat-resistant.

Regeneration freguency

Regenerate the air filter once every three months or so.

However, in casc it is found by periodical check that the air filter

becomes very dirty, regenerate it at adequate intervals. Regeneration

of the filter is possible up to about 10 times.

However, when it is considered that the air filter concerned can not

be used any longer, replace it with a spare.

Cleaning and regeneration

The air filter can be regenerated in a simple manner.

(2} In case dirt containing much carbon or oily dirt is deposited,
dip the dirty air filter in a neutral cleanser solution for a
while (about 20 to 30 minutes), and subscquently press the filter
to clean it.

(b} Ory dirt should be blawn off by shooting compressed air to the
filter efflux side, or should be sucked by means of an electric
cleaner.

(c) Rinse the air filter cleaned in the step (a) or (), by flowisig
cold or hot water (heater up to about 407C), and then dry it.

Precautions for cleaning

(a) #void washing the air filter by rubbing. Instead, wash by

pressing. It is more effective to place several dirty filter

28

--- PAGE 32 ---


--- PAGE 33 ---


--- PAGE 34 ---


--- PAGE 35 ---


--- PAGE 36 ---


--- PAGE 37 ---


--- PAGE 38 ---


--- PAGE 39 ---


--- PAGE 40 ---


--- PAGE 41 ---


--- PAGE 42 ---


--- PAGE 43 ---


--- PAGE 44 ---


--- PAGE 45 ---


--- PAGE 46 ---


--- PAGE 47 ---


--- PAGE 48 ---


--- PAGE 49 ---


--- PAGE 50 ---


--- PAGE 51 ---

